JUDY WOODRUFF: Welcome to our "PBS NewsHour"
special live coverage of the president's address
to a joint session of Congress and to the
nation.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
This will be President Trump's first opportunityto speak before Congress.
He said today the time is right for a new
immigration law, as long as both sides can
compromise.
Mr. Trump addresses a divided nation, with
high approval among Republicans, but disappointing
numbers from Democrats and even many independents.
He is also facing questions from Republican
lawmakers on priorities like health care and
federal spending.
Here with me now at the "NewsHour" table tonight,
our regular contributors, syndicated columnist
Mark Shields, New York Times columnist David
Brooks, and Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
Also joining us are Matt Schlapp, chair of
the American Conservative Union, and Karine
Jean-Pierre.
She was a senior adviser to MoveOn.org during
the 2016 elections.
And we welcome all of you tonight for the
next couple of hours, as we hear the president's
address.
David Brooks, it is the president's first
chance to, I guess, make a second impression?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think so, and try to
talk to people who he hasn't already won over,
try to lead an organization, instead of just
being the person who will do everything himself
because he knows more about everything than
anybody else.
He has got to rally a coalition.
And so, from what we have seen in the excerpts,
maybe a little of a softer, gentler kind of
the roly-poly, gentle Donald Trump.
What will be interesting to me is, does he
try to actually build a coalition and, two,
does he get into any details?
Is it sort of, I am going to make a gesture
to child care, I am going to make a gesture
to health care, I am going to make a gesture
to immigration, or does he actually draw some
edges?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields, what are you
looking for, as we keep an eye on the chamber
as the president approaches?
MARK SHIELDS: As a member of the roly-poly
caucus
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: As David said
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: president, who is a pretty trim
guy, and who doesn't trim on issues.
But I think the question, Judy, symbolically,
he reaches across in a great ceremonial moment
for all presidents and for citizens, extends
the olive branch.
But I -- if David is really curious about
his getting into the policy specifics, I would
ask him not to expect too much, because that
is not Donald Trump's strong suit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, as we wait for
that announcement that the president is there,
do we look for specifics, and does he really
need to give specifics?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political Report: No,
I don't think that it -- most presidents do
these as these sort of big vision statements,
and a whole bunch gets thrown in there that
they would love to do, but are not must-haves.
And it is also pretty clear, though, that
his -- the folks in Congress, his Republicans,
want him to give them a way, to show them
where your priorities are, what we are going
to be able to get done this year.
That may not happen in this speech.
Remember, this Congress can only handle so
much.
And getting through two very big pieces of
legislation, health care reform and tax reform,
that alone is going to take up all of their
energy and capital.
Trying to squeeze more in is going to be very
difficult thing to do.
So a lot of this is going to be talked about
tonight that may not go anywhere in 2017.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it looks like the president
is about to enter.
MAN: Mr. Speaker, the president of the United
States!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there he is.
Matt Schlapp is joining us from the American
Conservative Union.
You have wanted to see a Republican walk downthat aisle for a few years.
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White House Directorof Political Affairs: Yes.
I think it -- these are always great moments,
right?
And Donald Trump is -- has got the opportunity
with a very big television audience to address
people in a substantive way on his policy
priorities.
So, part of this is reacquainting the American
people with what he wants to do to get the
economy going, which is what this is all about.
And, second of all, he -- I agree with Amy.
It is also about urging Congress to get going.
Presidents always have a fickle relationship
with Congress, even the members of their own
party.
And he is going to try to urge them to work
together and get some stuff done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Karine Jean-Pierre, Republicanscertainly are in the majority.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, Democratic Strategist:
They sure all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They have got all three branches
of government right now.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: That's exactly right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is the role of theDemocrats, the opposition party?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think that the Democrats
need to continue to listen to the folks who
are on the street.
You know, the resistance has been very loud
since the day after inauguration, where we
had the women's march.
And they need to listen to the people, very
simple, very easily.
And they have shown that they are listening.
And I think they just need to continue to
do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks, we have -- we
are watching.
And we are watching Melania Trump, I think.
There she is in the front row up above looking
down.
That is the traditional seat for the firstlady, watching her husband.
The president continues to make his way toward
the front.
We just caught a quick glimpse of House Speaker
Paul Ryan and Vice President Mike Pence, first
time in his role, David, as the man sittingthere next to the speaker.
I am looking at this group right now.
It looks like mostly Republicans greeting
him.
There are a few Democrats.
DAVID BROOKS: This is the end of an era on
that aisle, where we had Eliot Engel from
New York, the House member, who camped out
probably six months early to get that seat.
And there was a tendency for the female members
of the House to wear bright red, so they can
show up on the TV.
Now they are all wearing white.
But there has been a changing of the guard
even along that aisle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins is with us
from the Capitol.
Lisa, you have been talking to some members.
What are they telling you?
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, it depends on theside that you are talking to.
Democrats think there's going to be a lot
to oppose in tonight's speech, no surprise.
But Republicans, interestingly, they know
that their fate is tied to this president.
And I do hear some anxiety, as well as some
hope from them.
Also, I am concerned about my wardrobe color
of red being out of date, now that David Brooks
has brought that up.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, Lisa, when you
say Republicans express anxiety, what do you
mean?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
Well, we were just speaking to Senator John
Thune.
He's in Republican leadership in the Senate.
And he said, "I am anxious to hear what the
president said."
And what he meant by that is that they know
this is an unconventional president, who sometimes
has, in their words, not executed things the
way they would like.
And they are interested in his words tonight,
because, sometimes, the president's words,
they will admit, have gotten him and Republicans
into trouble.
So, they are hoping for a solid address, as
Amy said, that covers broad vision, but they
say, with this president, you never can be
too sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are watching the president
turn and hand a copy of his remarks to the
vice president, to the House speaker.
It is a role -- it is a first for him to get
a chance to do this.
And we just got a quick glimpse of women dressed
in white.
And we will be able to talk about that later.
But we are watching this.
It is a first, and it is worth looking at
it and listening.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:
Thank you very much.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the House: Members
of Congress, I have the high privilege and
the distinct honor of presenting to you thepresident of the United States.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of
Congress, the first lady of the United States
(APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: and citizens of America, tonight,
as we mark the conclusion of our celebration
of Black History Month, we are reminded of
our nation s path toward civil rights and
the work that still remains to be done.
Recent threats
(APPLAUSE)
Recent threats targeting Jewish community
centers and vandalism of Jewish cemeteries,
as well as last week s shooting in Kansas
City, remind us that while we may be a nation
divided on policies, we are a country that
stands united in condemning hate and evilin all of its very ugly forms.
(APPLAUSE)
Each American generation passes the torch
of truth, liberty and justice, in an unbroken
chain all the way down to the present.
That torch is now in our hands.
And we will use it to light up the world.
I am here tonight to deliver a message of
unity and strength, and it is a message deeply
delivered from my heart.
A new chapter
(APPLAUSE)
of American greatness is now beginning.
A new national pride is sweeping across our
nation.
And a new surge of optimism is placing impossibledreams firmly within our grasp.
What we are witnessing today is the renewal
of the American spirit.
Our allies will find that America is once
again ready to lead.
(APPLAUSE)
All the nations of the world friend or
foe will find that America is strong,
America is proud, and America is free.
In nine years, the United States will celebrate
the 250th anniversary of our founding, 250
years since the day we declared our independence.
It will be one of the great milestones inthe history of the world.
But what will America look like as we reach
our 250th year?
What kind of country will we leave for our
children?
I will not allow the mistakes of recent decades
past to define the course of our future.
For too long, we ve watched our middle class
shrink as we ve exported our jobs and wealth
to foreign countries.
We ve financed and built one global project
after another, but ignored the fates of our
children in the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore,
Detroit, and so many other places throughout
our land.
We ve defended the borders of other nations,
while leaving our own borders wide open, for
anyone to cross, and for drugs to pour inat a now unprecedented rate.
And we ve spent trillions and trillions
of dollars overseas, while our infrastructure
at home has so badly crumbled.
Then, in 2016, the earth shifted beneath our
feet.
The rebellion started as a quiet protest,
spoken by families of all colors and creeds,
families who just wanted a fair shot for their
children, and a fair hearing for their concerns.
But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus,
as thousands of citizens now spoke out together,
from cities small and large, all across our
country.
Finally, the chorus became an earthquake,
and the people turned out by the tens of millions,
and they were all united by one very simple,
but crucial demand, that America must put
its own citizens first, because only then
can we truly make America great again.
(APPLAUSE)
Dying industries will come roaring back to
life.
Heroic veterans will get the care they so
desperately need.
Our military will be given the resources its
brave warriors so richly deserve.
Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced
with new roads, bridges, tunnels, airports
and railways, gleaming across our very, very
beautiful land.
Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down
and ultimately stop.
And our neglected inner cities will see a
rebirth of hope, safety, and opportunity.
Above all else, we will keep our promises
to the American people.
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you.
It s been a little over a month since my
inauguration, and I want to take this moment
to update the nation on the progress I vemade in keeping those promises.
Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler, General
Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel,
Walmart, and many others, have announced that
they will invest billions and billions of
dollars in the United States and will create
tens of thousands of new American jobs.
(APPLAUSE)
The stock market has gained almost $3 trillion
in value since the election on November 8th,
a record.
We ve saved taxpayers hundreds of millions
of dollars by bringing down the price of fantastic
and it is a fantastic new F-35 jet
fighter, and we ll be saving billions more
on contracts all across our government.
We have placed a hiring freeze on non-military
and non-essential federal workers.
We have begun to drain the swamp of government
corruption by imposing a five-year ban on
lobbying by executive branch officials and
a lifetime ban
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you.
And a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for
a foreign government.
We have undertaken a historic effort to massively
reduce job-crushing regulations, creating
a deregulation task force inside of every
government agency
(APPLAUSE)
and we re imposing a new rule which
mandates that for every one new regulation,
two old regulations must be eliminated.
(APPLAUSE)
We re going to stop the regulations that
threaten the future and livelihood of our
great coal miners.
(APPLAUSE)
We have cleared the way for the construction
of the Keystone and Dakota Access Pipelines
(APPLAUSE)
thereby creating tens of thousands of
jobs.
And I ve issued a new directive that new
American pipelines be made with American steel.
(APPLAUSE)
We have withdrawn the United States from the
job-killing Trans- Pacific Partnership.
(APPLAUSE)
And with the help of Prime Minister Justin
Trudeau, we have formed a council with our
neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women
entrepreneurs have access to the networks,
markets, and capital they need to start a
business and live out their financial dreams.
(APPLAUSE) To protect our citizens, I have
directed the Department of Justice to form
a task force on reducing violent crime.
I have further ordered the Departments of
Homeland Security and Justice, along with
the Department of State and the director of
national intelligence, to coordinate an aggressive
strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels
that have spread all across our nation.
(APPLAUSE)
We will stop the drugs from pouring into our
country and poisoning our youth, and we will
expand treatment for those who have become
so badly addicted.
(APPLAUSE)
At the same time, my administration has answered
the pleas of the American people for immigrationenforcement and border security.
(APPLAUSE)
By finally enforcing our immigration laws,
we will raise wages, help the unemployed,
save billions and billions of dollars, and
make our communities safer for everyone.
(APPLAUSE)
We want all Americans to succeed, but that
can t happen in an environment of lawless
chaos.
We must restore integrity and the rule of
law at our borders.
(APPLAUSE)
For that reason, we will soon begin the construction
of a great, great wall along our southern
border.
(APPLAUSE)
As we speak tonight, we are removing gang
members, drug dealers, and criminals that
threaten our communities and prey on our very
innocent citizens.
Bad ones are going out as I speak, and as
I promised throughout the campaign.
To any in Congress who do not believe we should
enforce our laws, I would ask you this one
question: What would you say to the American
family that loses their jobs, their income,
or their loved one, because America refused
to uphold its laws and defend its borders?
(APPLAUSE)
Our obligation is to serve, protect, and defend
the citizens of the United States.
We are also taking strong measures to protect
our nation from radical Islamic terrorism.
(APPLAUSE)
According to data provided by the Department
of Justice, the vast majority of individuals
convicted of terrorism and terrorism-related
offenses since 9/11 came here from outside
of our country.
We have seen the attacks at home, from Boston
to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and, yes,
even the World Trade Center.
We have seen the attacks in France, in Belgium,
in Germany, and all over the world.
It is not compassionate, but reckless to allow
uncontrolled entry from places where proper
vetting cannot occur.
(APPLAUSE)
Those given the high honor of admission to
the United States should support this country
and love its people and its values.
We cannot allow a beachhead of terrorism to
form inside America, and we cannot allow our
nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.
(APPLAUSE) That is why my administration has
been working on improved vetting procedures,
and we will shortly take new steps to keep
our nation safe, and to keep those out who
will do us harm.
(APPLAUSE)
As promised, I directed the Department of
Defense to develop a plan to demolish and
destroy ISIS, a network of lawless savages
that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians,
and men, women, and children of all faiths
and all beliefs.
We will work with our allies, including our
friends and allies in the Muslim world, to
extinguish this vile enemy from our planet.
(APPLAUSE)
I have also imposed new sanctions on entities
and individuals who support Iran s ballistic
missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable
alliance with the state of Israel.
(APPLAUSE)
Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint
a justice to the United States Supreme Court,
from my list of 20 judges, who will defend
our Constitution.
(APPLAUSE)
I am greatly honored to have Maureen Scalia
with us in the gallery tonight.
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you, Maureen.
Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will
forever be a symbol of American justice.
To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil
Gorsuch, a man of incredible skill and deep
devotion to the law.
He was confirmed unanimously by the Court
of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to
swiftly approve his nomination.
(APPLAUSE)
Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must
take as a country, we must honestly acknowledgethe circumstances we inherited.
Ninety- four million Americans are out of
the labor force.
Over 43 million people are now living in poverty.
And over 43 million Americans are on food
stamps.
More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working
years are not working.
We have the worst financial recovery in 65
years.
In the last 8 years, the past administration
has put on more new debt than nearly all of
the other presidents combined.
We ve lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing
jobs since NAFTA was approved, and we ve
lost 60,000 factories since China joined the
World Trade Organization in 2001.
Our trade deficit in goods with the world
last year was nearly $800 billion.
And overseas, we have inherited a series oftragic foreign policy disasters.
Solving these, and so many other pressing
problems, will require us to work past the
differences of party.
It will require us to tap into the American
spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout
our long and storied history.
But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad,
we must restart the engine of the American
economy, making it easier for companies to
do business in the United States and much,
much harder for companies to leave our country.
(APPLAUSE)
Right now, American companies are taxed at
one of the highest rates anywhere in the world.
My economic team is developing historic tax
reform that will reduce the tax rate on our
companies so they can compete and thrive anywhere
and with anyone.
(APPLAUSE)It will be a big, big cut.
At the same time, we will provide massivetax relief for the middle class.
We must create a level playing field for Americancompanies and our workers.
Have to do it.
(APPLAUSE)
Currently, when we ship products out of America,
many other countries make us pay very high
tariffs and taxes, but when foreign companies
ship their products into America, we chargethem nothing or almost nothing.
I just met with officials and workers from
a great American company, Harley-Davidson.
In fact, they proudly displayed five of their
magnificent motorcycles, made in the USA,
on the front lawn of the White House.
(APPLAUSE)
And they wanted me to ride one, and I said,
No, thank you.
(LAUGHTER)
At our meeting, I asked them, how are you
doing, how is business?
They said that it s good.
I asked them further, how are you doing with
other countries, mainly international sales?
TRUMP: They told me without even complaining,
because they have been so mistreated for so
long that they ve become used to it that
it s very hard to do business with other
countries because they tax our goods at such
a high rate.
They said that in the case of another country,
they taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.
They weren t even asking for a change.
But I am.
I believe
(APPLAUSE)
I believe strongly in free trade, but it also
has to be fair trade.
It s been a long time since we had fair
trade.
The first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln,
warned that the abandonment of the protective
policy by the American government will producewant and ruin among our people.
Lincoln was right, and it s time we heededhis advice and his words.
(APPLAUSE)
I am not going to let America and its great
companies and workers be taken advantage
of us any longer.
They have taken advantage of our country no
longer.
(APPLAUSE)
I am going to bring back millions of jobs.
Protecting our workers also means reformingour system of legal immigration.
(APPLAUSE)
The current, outdated system depresses wages
for our poorest workers and puts great pressure
on taxpayers.
Nations around the world, like Canada, Australia,
and many others, have a merit-based immigration
system.
(APPLAUSE)
It s a basic principle that those seeking
to enter a country ought to be able to support
themselves financially.
Yet, in America, we do not enforce this rule,
straining the very public resources that our
poorest citizens rely upon.
According to the National Academy of Sciences,
our current immigration system costs American
taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.
Switching away from this current system of
lower-skilled immigration, and instead adopting
a merit-based system, we will have so many
more benefits.
It will save countless dollars, raise workers
wages, and help struggling families, including
immigrant families, enter the middle class.
And they will do it quickly, and they willbe very, very happy, indeed.
(APPLAUSE)
I believe that real and positive immigration
reform is possible, as long as we focus on
the following goals: To improve jobs and wages
for Americans; to strengthen our nation s
security; and to restore respect for our laws.
If we are guided by the well-being of American
citizens, then I believe Republicans and Democrats
can work together to achieve an outcome that
has eluded our country for decades.
(APPLAUSE)
Another Republican president, Dwight D. Eisenhower,
initiated the last truly great national infrastructure
program: The building of the interstate highway
system.
The time has come for a new program of national
rebuilding.
(APPLAUSE)
America has spent approximately $6 trillion
in the Middle East, all the while our infrastructure
at home is crumbling.
With the $6 trillion, we could have rebuilt
our country twice, and maybe even three times,
if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.
(APPLAUSE)
To launch our national rebuilding, I will
be asking Congress to approve legislation
that produces a $1 trillion investment in
infrastructure of the United States, financed
through both public and private capital, creating
millions of new jobs.
(APPLAUSE)
This effort will be guided by two core principles:
Buy American and hire American.
(APPLAUSE)
Tonight, I am also calling on this Congress
to repeal and replace Obamacare
(APPLAUSE)
with reforms that expand choice, increase
access, lower costs, and at the same timeprovide better health care.
(APPLAUSE)
Mandating every American to buy government-approved
health insurance was never the right solution
for our country.
(APPLAUSE)
The way to make health insurance available
to everyone is to lower the cost of health
insurance, and that is what we are going to
do.
(APPLAUSE)
Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased
by double and triple digits.
As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent
last year alone.
Governor Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said
Obamacare is failing in his state, the state
of Kentucky, and it s unsustainable and
collapsing.
One third of the counties have only one insurer,
and they re losing them fast, they are losing
them so fast.
They re leaving.
And many Americans have no choice at all.
There s no choice left.
Remember when you were told that you could
keep your doctor and keep your plan?
We now know that all of those promises have
been totally broken.
Obamacare is collapsing, and we must act decisivelyto protect all Americans.
(APPLAUSE)
Action is not a choice; it is a necessity.
So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans
in Congress to work with us to save Americans
from this imploding Obamacare disaster.
(APPLAUSE)
Here are the principles that should guide
Congress as we move to create a better healthcare system for all Americans.
First, we should ensure that Americans with
pre-existing conditions have access to coverage
and that we have a stable transition for Americans
currently enrolled in the health care exchanges.
(APPLAUSE)
Secondly, we should help Americans purchase
their own coverage, through the use of tax
credits and expanded health savings accounts,
but it must be the plan they want, not the
plan forced on them by our government.
(APPLAUSE)
Thirdly, we should give our state governors
the resources and flexibility they need with
Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.
(APPLAUSE)
Fourth, we should implement legal reforms
that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary
costs that drive up the price of insurance
and work to bring down the artificially high
price of drugs and bring them down immediately.
(APPLAUSE)
And finally, the time has come to give Americans
the freedom to purchase health insurance across
state lines
(APPLAUSE)
which will create a truly competitive
national marketplace that will bring costs
way down and provide far better care.
So important.
Everything that is broken in our country can
be fixed.
Every problem can be solved.
And every hurting family can find healing
and hope.
Our citizens deserve this, and so much more,
so why not join forces and finally get the
job done and get it done right?
(APPLAUSE)
On this and so many other things, Democrats
and Republicans should get together and unite
for the good of our country and for the good
of the American people.
(APPLAUSE)
My administration wants to work with members
of both parties to make childcare accessible
and affordable, to help ensure new parents
that they have paid family leave
(APPLAUSE)
to invest in women s health, and to
promote clean air and clean water, and to
rebuild our military and our infrastructure.
(APPLAUSE)
True love for our people requires us to find
common ground, to advance the common good,
and to cooperate on behalf of every American
child who deserves a much brighter future.
An incredible young woman is with us this
evening who should serve as an inspiration
to us all.
Today is Rare Disease Day, and joining us
in the gallery is a rare disease survivor,
Megan Crowley.
Megan
(APPLAUSE)
Megan was diagnosed with Pompe disease, a
rare and serious illness, when she was 15
months old.
She was not expected to live past five.
On receiving this news, Megan s dad, John,
fought with everything he had to save the
life of his precious child.
He founded a company to look for a cure and
helped develop the drug that saved Megan s
life.
Today she is 20 years old and a sophomore
at Notre Dame.
(APPLAUSE)
Megan s story is about the unbounded power
of a father s love for a daughter.
But our slow and burdensome approval process
at the Food and Drug Administration keeps
too many advances, like the one that saved
Megan s life, from reaching those in need.
If we slash the restraints, not just at the
FDA but across our government, then we will
be blessed with far more miracles just like
Megan.
(APPLAUSE)
In fact, our children will grow up in a nation
of miracles.
But to achieve this future, we must enrich
the mind and the souls of every American
child.
Education is the civil rights issue of our
time.
(APPLAUSE)
I am calling upon members of both parties
to pass an education bill that funds school
choice for disadvantaged youth, including
millions of African-American and Latino children.
(APPLAUSE)
These families should be free to choose the
public, private, charter, magnet, religious,
or home school that is right for them.
(APPLAUSE)
Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable
woman, Denisha Merriweather.
As a young girl, Denisha struggled in schooland failed third grade twice.
But then she was able to enroll in a private
center for learning, great learning center,
with the help of a tax credit and a scholarship
program.
Today, she is the first in her family to graduate,
not just from high school, but from college.
Later this year, she will get her master s
degree in social work.
We want all children to be able to break the
cycle of poverty just like Denisha.
(APPLAUSE)
But to break the cycle of poverty, we must
also break the cycle of violence.
The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest
single- year increase in nearly half a century.
In Chicago, more than 4,000 people were shot
last year alone, and the murder rate so far
this year has been even higher.
This is not acceptable in our society.
(APPLAUSE)
Every American child should be able to grow
up in a safe community, to attend a great
school, and to have access to a high- paying
job.
(APPLAUSE)
But to create this future, we must work with
not against not against the menand women of law enforcement.
(APPLAUSE)
We must build bridges of cooperation and trust,
not drive the wedge of disunity and it s
really, it s what it is, division.
It s pure, unadulterated division.
We have to unify.
Police and sheriffs are members of our community.
They re friends and neighbors, they re
mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, and
they leave behind loved ones every day who
worry about whether or not they ll come
home safe and sound.
We must support the incredible men and women
of law enforcement.
(APPLAUSE)
And we must support the victims of crime.
I have ordered the Department of Homeland
Security to create an office to serve American
victims.
The office is called VOICE, Victims of Immigration
Crime Engagement.
We are providing a voice to those who have
been ignored by our media and silenced by
special interests.
Joining us
(APPLAUSE)
in the audience tonight are four very brave
Americans whose government failed them.
Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver,Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.
Jamiel s 17-year-old son was viciously murdered
by an illegal immigrant gang member who had
just been released from prison.
Jamiel Shaw, Jr., was an incredible young
man with unlimited potential who was getting
ready to go to college where he would have
excelled as a great college quarterback.
But he never got the chance.
His father, who is in the audience tonight,
has become a very good friend of mine.
Jamiel, thank you.
Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica
Davis.
Their husbands Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver
and Detective Michael Davis were slain
in the line of duty in California.
They were pillars of their community.
These brave men were viciously gunned down
by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record
and two prior deportations.
Should have never been in our country.
Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna.
Jenna, I want you to know that your father
was a hero and that tonight you have the love
of an entire country supporting you and praying
for you.
(APPLAUSE)
To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica, I want
you to know that we will never stop fighting
for justice.
Your loved ones will never, ever be forgotten.
We will always honor their memory.
(APPLAUSE)
Finally, to keep America safe, we must provide
the men and women of the United States military
with the tools they need to prevent war if
they must they have to fight and they
only have to win.
(APPLAUSE)
I am sending Congress a budget that rebuilds
the military, eliminates the defense sequester
(APPLAUSE)
and calls for one of the largest increases
in national defense spending in American history.
My budget will also increase funding for our
veterans.
Our veterans have delivered for this nation,
and now we must deliver for them.
(APPLAUSE)
The challenges we face as a nation are great.
But our people are even greater.
And none are greater or braver than those
who fight for America in uniform.
(APPLAUSE)
We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn
Owens, the widow of U.S. Navy Special Operator,
Senior Chief William Ryan Owens.
Ryan died as he lived, a warrior and a hero,
battling against terrorism and securing our
nation.
(APPLAUSE)
I just spoke to our great General Mattis just
now who reconfirmed that, and I quote, Ryan
was a part of a highly successful raid that
generated large amounts of vital intelligence
that will lead to many more victories in the
future against our enemy.
Ryan s legacy is etched into eternity.
Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
And Ryan is looking down right now.
You know that.
And he s very happy, because I think he
just broke a record.
(APPLAUSE)
For as the Bible teaches us, there is no greater
act of love than to lay down one s life
for one s friends.
Ryan laid down his life for his friends, for
his country, and for our freedom.
And we will never forget Ryan.
(APPLAUSE)
To those allies who wonder what kind of a
friend America will be, look no further thanthe heroes who wear our uniform.
Our foreign policy calls for a direct, robust,
and meaningful engagement with the world.
It is American leadership based on vital security
interests that we share with our allies all
across the globe.
We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged
through the bonds of two world wars, that
dethroned fascism
(APPLAUSE)
and a Cold War and defeated communism.
But our partners must meet their financial
obligations.
And now, based on our very strong and frank
discussions, they are beginning to do just
that.
In fact, I can tell you the money is pouring
in.
Very nice.
(APPLAUSE)
We expect our partners, whether in NATO, in
the Middle East, or in the Pacific, to take
a direct and meaningful role in both strategic
and military operations, and pay their fair
share of the cost.
Have to do that.
We will respect historic institutions, but
we will respect the foreign rights of all
nations.
And they have to respect our rights as a nation,
also.
(APPLAUSE)
Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing
the will of the people, and America respects
the right of all nations to chart their own
path.
My job is not to represent the world.
My job is to represent the United States of
America.
(APPLAUSE)
But we know that America is better off when
there is less conflict, not more.
We must learn from the mistakes of the past.
We have seen the war and the destruction that
have ravaged and raged throughout the world.
All across the world.
The only long-term solution for these humanitarian
disasters, in many cases, is to create the
conditions where displaced persons can safely
return home and begin the long, long process
of rebuilding.
(APPLAUSE)
America is willing to find new friends, and
to forge new partnerships, where shared interests
align.
We want harmony and stability, not war and
conflict.
We want peace, wherever peace can be found.
America is friends today with former enemies.
Some of our closest allies, decades ago, fought
on the opposite side of these terrible, terrible
wars.
This history should give us all faith in the
possibilities for a better world.
Hopefully, the 250th year for America will
see a world that is more peaceful, more just,
and more free.
On our 100th anniversary in 1876, citizens
from across our nation came to Philadelphia
to celebrate America s centennial.
At that celebration, the country s builders
and artists and inventors showed off their
wonderful creations.
Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone
for the first time.
Remington unveiled the first typewriter.
An early attempt was made at electric light.
Thomas Edison showed an automatic telegraph
and an electric pen.
Imagine the wonders our country could know
in America s 250th year.
(APPLAUSE)
Think of the marvels we could achieve if we
simply set free the dreams of our people.
Cures to the illnesses that have always plaguedus are not too much to hope.
American footprints on distant worlds are
not too big a dream.
Millions lifted from welfare to work is not
too much to expect.
And streets where mothers are safe from fear
schools where children learn in peace,
and jobs where Americans prosper and grow are not too much to ask.
(APPLAUSE)
When we have all of this, we will have made
America greater than ever before, for all
Americans.
This is our vision.
This is our mission.
But we can only get there together.
We are one people, with one destiny.
We all bleed the same blood.
We all salute the same great American flag.
And we are all made by the same God.
(APPLAUSE)
When we fulfill this vision, when we celebrate
our 250 years of glorious freedom, we will
look back on tonight as when this new chapter
of American greatness began.
The time for small thinking is over.
The time for trivial fights is behind us.
We just need the courage to share the dreams
that fill our hearts, the bravery to express
the hopes that stir our souls, and the confidence
to turn those hopes and those dreams into
action.
From now on, America will be empowered by
our aspirations, not burdened by our fears,
inspired by the future, not bound by failures
of the past, and guided by a vision, not blinded
by our doubts.
I am asking all citizens to embrace this renewal
of the American spirit.
I am asking all members of Congress to join
me in dreaming big, and bold, and daring things
for our country.
I am askinBlack History Month, we are reminded
of our nation s path toward civil rights
and the work that still remains to be done.
Recent threats
(APPLAUSE)
Recent threats targeting Jewish community
centers and vandalism of Jewish cemeteries,
as well as last week s shooting in Kansas
City, remind us that while we may be a nation
divided on policies, we are a country that
stands united in condemning hate and evil
in all of its very ugly forms.
(APPLAUSE)
Each American generation passes the torch
of truth, liberty and justice, in an unbroken
chain all the way down to the present.
That torch is now in our hands.
And we will use it to light up the world.
I am here tonight to deliver a message of
unity and strength, and it is a message deeply
delivered from my heart.
A new chapter
(APPLAUSE)
of American greatness is now beginning.
A new national pride is sweeping across our
nation.
And a new surge of optimism is placing impossibledreams firmly within our grasp.
What we are witnessing today is the renewal
of the American spirit.
Our allies will find that America is once
again ready to lead.
(APPLAUSE)
All the nations of the world friend or
foe will find that America is strong,
America is proud, and America is free.
In nine years, the United States will celebrate
the 250th anniversary of our founding, 250
years since the day we declared our independence.
It will be one of the great milestones inthe history of the world.
But what will America look like as we reach
our 250th year?
What kind of country will we leave for our
children?
I will not allow the mistakes of recent decades
past to define the course of our future.
For too long, we ve watched our middle class
shrink as we ve exported our jobs and wealth
to foreign countries.
We ve financed and built one global project
after another, but ignored the fates of our
children in the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore,
Detroit, and so many other places throughout
our land.
We ve defended the borders of other nations,
while leaving our own borders wide open, for
anyone to cross, and for drugs to pour inat a now unprecedented rate.
And we ve spent trillions and trillions
of dollars overseas, while our infrastructure
at home has so badly crumbled.
Then, in 2016, the earth shifted beneath our
feet.
The rebellion started as a quiet protest,
spoken by families of all colors and creeds,
families who just wanted a fair shot for their
children, and a fair hearing for their concerns.
But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus,
as thousands of citizens now spoke out together,
from cities small and large, all across our
country.
Finally, the chorus became an earthquake,
and the people turned out by the tens of millions,
and they were all united by one very simple,
but crucial demand, that America must put
its own citizens first, because only then
can we truly make America great again.
(APPLAUSE)
Dying industries will come roaring back to
life.
Heroic veterans will get the care they so
desperately need.
Our military will be given the resources its
brave warriors so richly deserve.
Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced
with new roads, bridges, tunnels, airports
and railways, gleaming across our very, very
beautiful land.
Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down
and ultimately stop.
And our neglected inner cities will see a
rebirth of hope, safety, and opportunity.
Above all else, we will keep our promises
to the American people.
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you.
It s been a little over a month since my
inauguration, and I want to take this moment
to update the nation on the progress I vemade in keeping those promises.
Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler, General
Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel,
Walmart, and many others, have announced that
they will invest billions and billions of
dollars in the United States and will create
tens of thousands of new American jobs.
(APPLAUSE)
The stock market has gained almost $3 trillion
in value since the election on November 8th,
a record.
We ve saved taxpayers hundreds of millions
of dollars by bringing down the price of fantastic
and it is a fantastic new F-35 jet
fighter, and we ll be saving billions more
on contracts all across our government.
We have placed a hiring freeze on non-military
and non-essential federal workers.
We have begun to drain the swamp of government
corruption by imposing a five-year ban on
lobbying by executive branch officials and
a lifetime ban
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you.
And a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for
a foreign government.
We have undertaken a historic effort to massively
reduce job-crushing regulations, creating
a deregulation task force inside of every
government agency
(APPLAUSE)
and we re imposing a new rule which
mandates that for every one new regulation,
two old regulations must be eliminated.
(APPLAUSE)
We re going to stop the regulations that
threaten the future and livelihood of our
great coal miners.
(APPLAUSE)
We have cleared the way for the construction
of the Keystone and Dakota Access Pipelines
(APPLAUSE)
thereby creating tens of thousands of
jobs.
And I ve issued a new directive that new
American pipelines be made with American steel.
(APPLAUSE)
We have withdrawn the United States from the
job-killing Trans- Pacific Partnership.
(APPLAUSE)
And with the help of Prime Minister Justin
Trudeau, we have formed a council with our
neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women
entrepreneurs have access to the networks,
markets, and capital they need to start a
business and live out their financial dreams.
(APPLAUSE) To protect our citizens, I have
directed the Department of Justice to form
a task force on reducing violent crime.
I have further ordered the Departments of
Homeland Security and Justice, along with
the Department of State and the director of
national intelligence, to coordinate an aggressive
strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels
that have spread all across our nation.
(APPLAUSE)
We will stop the drugs from pouring into our
country and poisoning our youth, and we will
expand treatment for those who have become
so badly addicted.
(APPLAUSE)
At the same time, my administration has answered
the pleas of the American people for immigration
enforcement and border security.
(APPLAUSE)
By finally enforcing our immigration laws,
we will raise wages, help the unemployed,
save billions and billions of dollars, and
make our communities safer for everyone.
(APPLAUSE)
We want all Americans to succeed, but that
can t happen in an environment of lawless
chaos.
We must restore integrity and the rule of
law at our borders.
(APPLAUSE)
For that reason, we will soon begin the construction
of a great, great wall along our southern
border.
(APPLAUSE)
As we speak tonight, we are removing gang
members, drug dealers, and criminals that
threaten our communities and prey on our very
innocent citizens.
Bad ones are going out as I speak, and as
I promised throughout the campaign.
To any in Congress who do not believe we should
enforce our laws, I would ask you this one
question: What would you say to the American
family that loses their jobs, their income,
or their loved one, because America refused
to uphold its laws and defend its borders?
(APPLAUSE)
Our obligation is to serve, protect, and defend
the citizens of the United States.
We are also taking strong measures to protect
our nation from radical Islamic terrorism.
(APPLAUSE)
According to data provided by the Department
of Justice, the vast majority of individuals
convicted of terrorism and terrorism-related
offenses since 9/11 came here from outside
of our country.
We have seen the attacks at home, from Boston
to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and, yes,
even the World Trade Center.
We have seen the attacks in France, in Belgium,
in Germany, and all over the world.
It is not compassionate, but reckless to allow
uncontrolled entry from places where proper
vetting cannot occur.
(APPLAUSE)
Those given the high honor of admission to
the United States should support this country
and love its people and its values.
We cannot allow a beachhead of terrorism to
form inside America, and we cannot allow our
nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.
(APPLAUSE) That is why my administration has
been working on improved vetting procedures,
and we will shortly take new steps to keep
our nation safe, and to keep those out who
will do us harm.
(APPLAUSE)
As promised, I directed the Department of
Defense to develop a plan to demolish and
destroy ISIS, a network of lawless savages
that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians,
and men, women, and children of all faiths
and all beliefs.
We will work with our allies, including our
friends and allies in the Muslim world, to
extinguish this vile enemy from our planet.
(APPLAUSE)
I have also imposed new sanctions on entities
and individuals who support Iran s ballistic
missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable
alliance with the state of Israel.
(APPLAUSE)
Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint
a justice to the United States Supreme Court,
from my list of 20 judges, who will defend
our Constitution.
(APPLAUSE)
I am greatly honored to have Maureen Scaliawith us in the gallery tonight.
Thank you, Maureen.
Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will
forever be a symbol of American justice.
To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil
Gorsuch, a man of incredible skill and deep
devotion to the law.
He was confirmed unanimously by the Court
of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to
swiftly approve his nomination.
(APPLAUSE)
Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must
take as a country, we must honestly acknowledge
the circumstances we inherited.
Ninety- four million Americans are out of
the labor force.
Over 43 million people are now living in poverty.
And over 43 million Americans are on food
stamps.
More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working
years are not working.
We have the worst financial recovery in 65
years.
In the last 8 years, the past administration
has put on more new debt than nearly all of
the other presidents combined.
We ve lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing
jobs since NAFTA was approved, and we ve
lost 60,000 factories since China joined the
World Trade Organization in 2001.
Our trade deficit in goods with the world
last year was nearly $800 billion.
And overseas, we have inherited a series oftragic foreign policy disasters.
Solving these, and so many other pressing
problems, will require us to work past the
differences of party.
It will require us to tap into the American
spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout
our long and storied history.
But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad,
we must restart the engine of the American
economy, making it easier for companies to
do business in the United States and much,
much harder for companies to leave our country.
(APPLAUSE)
Right now, American companies are taxed at
one of the highest rates anywhere in the world.
My economic team is developing historic tax
reform that will reduce the tax rate on our
companies so they can compete and thrive anywhere
and with anyone.
(APPLAUSE)
It will be a big, big cut.
At the same time, we will provide massivetax relief for the middle class.
We must create a level playing field for Americancompanies and our workers.
Have to do it.
(APPLAUSE)
Currently, when we ship products out of America,
many other countries make us pay very high
tariffs and taxes, but when foreign companies
ship their products into America, we charge
them nothing or almost nothing.
I just met with officials and workers from
a great American company, Harley-Davidson.
In fact, they proudly displayed five of their
magnificent motorcycles, made in the USA,
on the front lawn of the White House.
(APPLAUSE)
And they wanted me to ride one, and I said,
No, thank you.
(LAUGHTER)
At our meeting, I asked them, how are you
doing, how is business?
They said that it s good.
I asked them further, how are you doing with
other countries, mainly international sales?
TRUMP: They told me without even complaining,
because they have been so mistreated for so
long that they ve become used to it that
it s very hard to do business with other
countries because they tax our goods at such
a high rate.
They said that in the case of another country,
they taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.
They weren t even asking for a change.
But I am.
I believe
(APPLAUSE)
I believe strongly in free trade, but it also
has to be fair trade.
It s been a long time since we had fair
trade.
The first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln,
warned that the abandonment of the protective
policy by the American government will producewant and ruin among our people.
Lincoln was right, and it s time we heededhis advice and his words.
(APPLAUSE)
I am not going to let America and its great
companies and workers be taken advantage
of us any longer.
They have taken advantage of our country no
longer.
(APPLAUSE)
I am going to bring back millions of jobs.
Protecting our workers also means reformingour system of legal immigration.
(APPLAUSE)
The current, outdated system depresses wages
for our poorest workers and puts great pressure
on taxpayers.
Nations around the world, like Canada, Australia,
and many others, have a merit-based immigration
system.
(APPLAUSE)
It s a basic principle that those seeking
to enter a country ought to be able to support
themselves financially.
Yet, in America, we do not enforce this rule,
straining the very public resources that our
poorest citizens rely upon.
According to the National Academy of Sciences,
our current immigration system costs American
taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.
Switching away from this current system of
lower-skilled immigration, and instead adopting
a merit-based system, we will have so many
more benefits.
It will save countless dollars, raise workers
wages, and help struggling families, including
immigrant families, enter the middle class.
And they will do it quickly, and they willbe very, very happy, indeed.
(APPLAUSE)
I believe that real and positive immigration
reform is possible, as long as we focus on
the following goals: To improve jobs and wages
for Americans; to strengthen our nation s
security; and to restore respect for our laws.
If we are guided by the well-being of American
citizens, then I believe Republicans and Democrats
can work together to achieve an outcome that
has eluded our country for decades.
(APPLAUSE)
Another Republican president, Dwight D. Eisenhower,
initiated the last truly great national infrastructure
program: The building of the interstate highway
system.
The time has come for a new program of national
rebuilding.
(APPLAUSE)
America has spent approximately $6 trillion
in the Middle East, all the while our infrastructure
at home is crumbling.
With the $6 trillion, we could have rebuilt
our country twice, and maybe even three times,
if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.
(APPLAUSE)
To launch our national rebuilding, I will
be asking Congress to approve legislation
that produces a $1 trillion investment in
infrastructure of the United States, financed
through both public and private capital, creating
millions of new jobs.
(APPLAUSE)
This effort will be guided by two core principles:Buy American and hire American.
Tonight, I am also calling on this Congressto repeal and replace Obamacare
(APPLAUSE)
with reforms that expand choice, increase
access, lower costs, and at the same time
provide better health care.
(APPLAUSE)
Mandating every American to buy government-approved
health insurance was never the right solution
for our country.
(APPLAUSE)
The way to make health insurance available
to everyone is to lower the cost of health
insurance, and that is what we are going to
do.
(APPLAUSE)
Obamacare premiums nationwide have increasedby double and triple digits.
As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent
last year alone.
Governor Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said
Obamacare is failing in his state, the state
of Kentucky, and it s unsustainable and
collapsing.
One third of the counties have only one insurer,
and they re losing them fast, they are losing
them so fast.
They re leaving.
And many Americans have no choice at all.
There s no choice left.
Remember when you were told that you could
keep your doctor and keep your plan?
We now know that all of those promises have
been totally broken.
Obamacare is collapsing, and we must act decisivelyto protect all Americans.
(APPLAUSE)
Action is not a choice; it is a necessity.
So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans
in Congress to work with us to save Americans
from this imploding Obamacare disaster.
(APPLAUSE)
Here are the principles that should guide
Congress as we move to create a better health
care system for all Americans.
First, we should ensure that Americans with
pre-existing conditions have access to coverage
and that we have a stable transition for Americans
currently enrolled in the health care exchanges.
(APPLAUSE)
Secondly, we should help Americans purchase
their own coverage, through the use of tax
credits and expanded health savings accounts,
but it must be the plan they want, not the
plan forced on them by our government.
(APPLAUSE)
Thirdly, we should give our state governors
the resources and flexibility they need with
Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.
(APPLAUSE)
Fourth, we should implement legal reforms
that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary
costs that drive up the price of insurance
and work to bring down the artificially high
price of drugs and bring them down immediately.
(APPLAUSE)
And finally, the time has come to give Americans
the freedom to purchase health insurance across
state lines
(APPLAUSE)
which will create a truly competitive
national marketplace that will bring costs
way down and provide far better care.
So important.
Everything that is broken in our country can
be fixed.
Every problem can be solved.
And every hurting family can find healing
and hope.
Our citizens deserve this, and so much more,
so why not join forces and finally get the
job done and get it done right?
(APPLAUSE)
On this and so many other things, Democrats
and Republicans should get together and unite
for the good of our country and for the good
of the American people.
(APPLAUSE)
My administration wants to work with members
of both parties to make childcare accessible
and affordable, to help ensure new parents
that they have paid family leave
(APPLAUSE)
to invest in women s health, and to
promote clean air and clean water, and to
rebuild our military and our infrastructure.
(APPLAUSE)
True love for our people requires us to find
common ground, to advance the common good,
and to cooperate on behalf of every American
child who deserves a much brighter future.
An incredible young woman is with us this
evening who should serve as an inspiration
to us all.
Today is Rare Disease Day, and joining us
in the gallery is a rare disease survivor,
Megan Crowley.
Megan
(APPLAUSE)
Megan was diagnosed with Pompe disease, a
rare and serious illness, when she was 15
months old.
She was not expected to live past five.
On receiving this news, Megan s dad, John,
fought with everything he had to save the
life of his precious child.
He founded a company to look for a cure and
helped develop the drug that saved Megan s
life.
Today she is 20 years old and a sophomore
at Notre Dame.
(APPLAUSE)
Megan s story is about the unbounded power
of a father s love for a daughter.
But our slow and burdensome approval process
at the Food and Drug Administration keeps
too many advances, like the one that saved
Megan s life, from reaching those in need.
If we slash the restraints, not just at the
FDA but across our government, then we will
be blessed with far more miracles just like
Megan.
(APPLAUSE)
In fact, our children will grow up in a nation
of miracles.
But to achieve this future, we must enrich
the mind and the souls of every American
child.
Education is the civil rights issue of our
time.
(APPLAUSE)
I am calling upon members of both parties
to pass an education bill that funds school
choice for disadvantaged youth, including
millions of African-American and Latino children.
(APPLAUSE)
These families should be free to choose the
public, private, charter, magnet, religious,
or home school that is right for them.
(APPLAUSE)
Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkablewoman, Denisha Merriweather.
As a young girl, Denisha struggled in schooland failed third grade twice.
But then she was able to enroll in a private
center for learning, great learning center,
with the help of a tax credit and a scholarship
program.
Today, she is the first in her family to graduate,
not just from high school, but from college.
Later this year, she will get her master s
degree in social work.
We want all children to be able to break the
cycle of poverty just like Denisha.
(APPLAUSE)
But to break the cycle of poverty, we must
also break the cycle of violence.
The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest
single- year increase in nearly half a century.
In Chicago, more than 4,000 people were shot
last year alone, and the murder rate so far
this year has been even higher.
This is not acceptable in our society.
(APPLAUSE)
Every American child should be able to grow
up in a safe community, to attend a great
school, and to have access to a high- paying
job.
(APPLAUSE)
But to create this future, we must work with
not against not against the men
and women of law enforcement.
(APPLAUSE)
We must build bridges of cooperation and trust,
not drive the wedge of disunity and it s
really, it s what it is, division.
It s pure, unadulterated division.
We have to unify.
Police and sheriffs are members of our community.
They re friends and neighbors, they re
mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, and
they leave behind loved ones every day who
worry about whether or not they ll come
home safe and sound.
We must support the incredible men and women
of law enforcement.
(APPLAUSE)
And we must support the victims of crime.
I have ordered the Department of Homeland
Security to create an office to serve American
victims.
The office is called VOICE, Victims of Immigration
Crime Engagement.
We are providing a voice to those who have
been ignored by our media and silenced by
special interests.
Joining us
(APPLAUSE)
Joining us in the audience tonight are four
very brave Americans whose government failed
them.
Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver,Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.
Jamiel s 17-year-old son was viciously murdered
by an illegal immigrant gang member who had
just been released from prison.
Jamiel Shaw, Jr., was an incredible young
man with unlimited potential who was getting
ready to go to college where he would have
excelled as a great college quarterback.
But he never got the chance.
His father, who is in the audience tonight,
has become a very good friend of mine.
Jamiel, thank you.
Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica
Davis.
Their husbands Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver
and Detective Michael Davis were slain
in the line of duty in California.
They were pillars of their community.
These brave men were viciously gunned down
by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record
and two prior deportations.
Should have never been in our country.
Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna.
Jenna, I want you to know that your father
was a hero and that tonight you have the love
of an entire country supporting you and praying
for you.
(APPLAUSE)
To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica, I want
you to know that we will never stop fighting
for justice.
Your loved ones will never, ever be forgotten.
We will always honor their memory.
(APPLAUSE)
Finally, to keep America safe, we must provide
the men and women of the United States military
with the tools they need to prevent war if
they must they have to fight and they
only have to win.
(APPLAUSE)
I am sending Congress a budget that rebuilds
the military, eliminates the defense sequester
(APPLAUSE)
and calls for one of the largest increases
in national defense spending in American history.
My budget will also increase funding for our
veterans.
Our veterans have delivered for this nation,
and now we must deliver for them.
(APPLAUSE)
The challenges we face as a nation are great.
But our people are even greater.
And none are greater or braver than those
who fight for America in uniform.
(APPLAUSE)
We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn
Owens, the widow of U.S. Navy Special Operator,
Senior Chief William Ryan Owens.
Ryan died as he lived, a warrior and a hero,
battling against terrorism and securing our
nation.
(APPLAUSE)
I just spoke to our great General Mattis just
now who reconfirmed that, and I quote, Ryan
was a part of a highly successful raid that
generated large amounts of vital intelligence
that will lead to many more victories in thefuture against our enemy.
Ryan s legacy is etched into eternity.
Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
And Ryan is looking down right now.
You know that.
And he s very happy, because I think he
just broke a record.
(APPLAUSE)
For as the Bible teaches us, there is no greater
act of love than to lay down one s life
for one s friends.
Ryan laid down his life for his friends, for
his country, and for our freedom.
And we will never forget Ryan.
(APPLAUSE)
To those allies who wonder what kind of a
friend America will be, look no further than
the heroes who wear our uniform.
Our foreign policy calls for a direct, robust,
and meaningful engagement with the world.
It is American leadership based on vital security
interests that we share with our allies all
across the globe.
We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged
through the bonds of two world wars, that
dethroned fascism
(APPLAUSE)
and a Cold War and defeated communism.
But our partners must meet their financial
obligations.
And now, based on our very strong and frank
discussions, they are beginning to do just
that.
In fact, I can tell you the money is pouring
in.
Very nice.
(APPLAUSE)
We expect our partners, whether in NATO, in
the Middle East, or in the Pacific, to take
a direct and meaningful role in both strategic
and military operations, and pay their fair
share of the cost.
Have to do that.
We will respect historic institutions, but
we will respect the foreign rights of all
nations.
And they have to respect our rights as a nation,
also.
(APPLAUSE)
Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing
the will of the people, and America respects
the right of all nations to chart their own
path.
My job is not to represent the world.
My job is to represent the United States of
America.
(APPLAUSE)
But we know that America is better off when
there is less conflict, not more.
We must learn from the mistakes of the past.
We have seen the war and the destruction that
have ravaged and raged throughout the world.
All across the world.
The only long-term solution for these humanitarian
disasters, in many cases, is to create the
conditions where displaced persons can safely
return home and begin the long, long process
of rebuilding.
(APPLAUSE)
America is willing to find new friends, and
to forge new partnerships, where shared interests
align.
We want harmony and stability, not war and
conflict.
We want peace, wherever peace can be found.
America is friends today with former enemies.
Some of our closest allies, decades ago, fought
on the opposite side of these terrible, terrible
wars.
This history should give us all faith in the
possibilities for a better world.
Hopefully, the 250th year for America will
see a world that is more peaceful, more just,
and more free.
On our 100th anniversary in 1876, citizens
from across our nation came to Philadelphia
to celebrate America s centennial.
At that celebration, the country s builders
and artists and inventors showed off their
wonderful creations.
Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone
for the first time.
Remington unveiled the first typewriter.
An early attempt was made at electric light.
Thomas Edison showed an automatic telegraph
and an electric pen.
Imagine the wonders our country could know
in America s 250th year.
(APPLAUSE)
Think of the marvels we could achieve if we
simply set free the dreams of our people.
Cures to the illnesses that have always plaguedus are not too much to hope.
American footprints on distant worlds are
not too big a dream.
Millions lifted from welfare to work is not
too much to expect.
And streets where mothers are safe from fear
schools where children learn in peace,
and jobs where Americans prosper and grow are not too much to ask.
(APPLAUSE)
When we have all of this, we will have made
America greater than ever before, for all
Americans.
This is our vision.
This is our mission.
But we can only get there together.
We are one people, with one destiny.
We all bleed the same blood.
We all salute the same great American flag.
And we are all made by the same God.
(APPLAUSE)
When we fulfill this vision, when we celebrate
our 250 years of glorious freedom, we will
look back on tonight as when this new chapterof American greatness began.
The time for small thinking is over.
The time for trivial fights is behind us.
We just need the courage to share the dreams
that fill our hearts, the bravery to express
the hopes that stir our souls, and the confidence
to turn those hopes and those dreams into
action.
From now on, America will be empowered by
our aspirations, not burdened by our fears,
inspired by the future, not bound by failures
of the past, and guided by a vision, not blinded
by our doubts.
I am asking all citizens to embrace this renewal
of the American spirit.
I am asking all members of Congress to join
me in dreaming big, and bold, and daring things
for our country.
I am asking everyone watching tonight to seize
this moment.
Believe in yourselves.
Believe in your future.
And believe, once more, in America.
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you, God bless you, andGod bless the United States.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that concludes President
Trump's address to a joint session of Congress,
his first address to a joint session.
Coming up in just a few minutes will be the
Democrats' response.
It will be delivered by the former Kentucky
Governor Steve Beshear.
And a woman named Astrid Silva, she was brought
to the United States as a child without legal
documentation, one of the dreamers, she'snow an immigration activist.
She will deliver the Democrats' Spanish-language
response.
Still joining here us at the "NewsHour" table
in Washington are Mark Shields, David Brooks,
Amy Walter, Matt Schlapp, and Karine Jean-Pierre.
Mark Shields, this was Donald Trump's, some
would say, second attempt to tell the American
people what he wants to do as president.
We have heard his inaugural address.
This was a very different speech.
MARK SHIELDS: Very, very different speech,
short on American carnage, a lot more upbeat
in sections.
I -- what just amazes me about him is, he
goes from an appeal to unity, and we have
to work together, and then insists on calling
the Democratic health plan a disaster, which
is not a bridge-building -- is not bridge-building
language.
And, you know, it was -- it is an expensive
speech.
It is a very -- there's a -- you put a dollar
sign next to that.
But he did do what other presidents have done
that was far more traditional and ceremonial
than the Donald Trump we have come to expect.
It -- there was a little self-congratulatory
at the outset.
And he returns to that from time to time.
But I have to admit, I was just blown away
by the section on Ryan Owens, which seemed
incredibly self-serving on his part.
He had been criticized for that mission.
And, today, he blamed it on the commanders,
the military commanders, and said that his
death was theirs.
And I don't know.
That just struck me as a -- it was an unseemly
invocation and use of a widow who is obviously
grieving.
So, I give it a very -- he gave himself a
C, I think, on presentation today.
I would give him a C-plus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He gave himself a C today on
messaging.
MARK SHIELDS: Messaging, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks, what did you
think?
DAVID BROOKS: I guess, on the Trump scale,
I would give it an A. It is the best speech
I have ever seen him give, I think.
It was action-packed, so you got the sense
a lot was happening.
It had the right balance of anger about the
situation, was a lot more upbeat than normal,
so it had a better emotional mix, I would
say.
I thought the Ryan Owens moment was actually
a powerful moment to watch her and her testimony.
It was also a little shift in the Republican
Party.
If you are trying to work with the working
class that is having severe problems, you
can't simply be a party that, well, governmentis going to get out of the way.
And that's where the Republicans have been
for the last 20 years.
And so he gave an action plan that included
some family leave and things like that, unexpected
from a Republican president.
So, I thought it was -- people will say itis a conventional speech.
He has risen to the level of conventional.
But, substantively, he has actually shifted
ground for the Republican Party away from
the conventional.
So I thought it was the best thing I have
seen him from him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, something different?
AMY WALTER: No, I would say -- I would have
to much more with David on this, and that,
now, when we would go out on the campaign
trail, and even right after President Trump
was elected, voters would say over and over
again, I just wish that he would act more
presidential.
I am hoping he is going to be more presidential.
I wonder, once he is in office, he's going
to able to get off Twitter or get off the
off-the-cuff statements and really focus.
And as I was listening to the speech, I thought,
well, just imagine if this is what he did
every day, that there weren't the 5:00 a.m.
Twitter screeds, there wasn't the attack on
people that he disagreed with, but that hejust focused on these issues.
And it would be a very -- we would be at avery different place right now.
So, the question in my mind isn't, did he
give a good speech, because I think he did,
and he accomplished what he set out to accomplish.
It's, can he do this every day?
And that's what it is going to require toget a lot of this big stuff.
Some of it is never going to happen.
But on taxes, and on Obamacare, he has got
to be this disciplined every day, and to be
able to keep coming back to the things hesaid were very important.
Also important to note that he did mention
in here an issue that had been coming here,
there, everywhere.
Mike Pence, the vice president, had to go,
when he went overseas, to assure our European
allies we are OK with NATO.
He did that again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: He did that specifically in this
speech to say, we believe in NATO.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Schlapp, what did you
take away?
MATT SCHLAPP: I thought it was a great speech.
I think the people we elect to the presidency
change the presidency.
And Donald Trump has changed the presidency.
He talks in a way we haven't seen a president
talk before.
He tweets in a way we have never seen a president
tweet before.
And to a certain extent, you know, when you
watch that chamber, it is separated right
from left, Democrat from Republican.
And it was strange to me that he wasn't so
much talking to them as he was talking to
this forgotten man and woman, this middle-class
voter in flyover country who might have his
name on the front of his work shirt.
That's what his whole focus is.
It is on that voter.
And I think it is a little -- it is a little
different to have a president to do that.
Yes, he called Republicans and Democrats towork together on the big things.
Yes, he attacked Obama on what he sees as
his failings.
But his voice is the voice for that voter.
And that's the voter that put him in office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine Jean-Pierre?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Yes, so I think it was
basically a toned-down campaign speech.
It was lots of rhetoric, little details.
One of the things that I think was actually
newsworthy is that he didn't talk about Russia
at all and all of the scandal that is swirling
around him.
He doubled down on mass deportation, on the
Muslim ban, on taking people's health care
away.
And there is another thing that I realize
he didn't do, speaking of a campaign-type
speech, is that, normally, on the campaign,
he would rail against the -- Goldman Sachs
and talk about how he is the man of the people.
And you didn't kind of -- you didn't hearthat language either in this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was striking, Mark, that
it -- actually, I want to go to John -- our
John Yang, who is at the White House.
John, North Lawn of the White House, you and
I were at the lunch with the president today
with other television reporters and anchors.
And it was striking to me then that Russia
-- he wasn't engaging on the Russia question,
which has been out there hanging over his
administration for the last several weeks.
JOHN YANG: Well, I think that, I mean, the
fact that he didn't talk about it tonight,
I think that this was a speech where he was
trying not to get bogged down in sort of reacting
to the controversy surrounding him and trying
to be a little broader and a little -- the
words we kept hearing today, be a little more
uplifting, be a little more optimistic.
I think that tone at the end with the closing
little coda of trying to pull people together
and rise above and try to do new things, I
think that was the message that they wanted
to leave the country with and to leave Congress
with at the end of this message..
JUDY WOODRUFF: John is at the White House
for us.
And on the Capitol -- on Capitol Hill, at
Statuary Hall -- we are not going to go to
Lisa Desjardins right now, but we will go
to her in a few minutes.
But, Mark, I want to come back to what Matt
and Karine were just saying, I mean, really,
two very different views of this speech.
And it seems me he was combining some of,
you know, what we have been hearing from him,
the mantra we have heard from him about crime
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: and about saving money and
about -- and he spoke about how much he wants
to spend on defense, but he didn't dwell on
that.
He did talk about reaching out and helping
those who need help.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I mean, he did.
He returned to the theme.
Chicago.
I mean, you take Chicago out of the equation,
and there isn't a lot of domestic conversation.
And there is nothing that he is going to do
on Chicago, except support the police, which
I think, most American presidents, has been
their position.
This is the first American president in my
lifetime who has not welcomed the designation
as leader of the free world.
He rejected the leader of the free world.
And that is an enormous change in the definitionof an American president.
And I just was struck by that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you -- what do you mean
by that?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, in other words, he says,
I am not the leader of the -- I am just the
leader of the United States.
I am the leader of you.
I am the American leader.
I'm not -- and America has welcomed, sometimes
reluctantly, but nobly and to the transformation
of the planet, that -- that responsibility
of being the leader of the free world.
And without it, there wouldn't be a free world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Before we hear from Steve Beshear, the former
governor of Kentucky, for the Democratic response,
we are going to go quickly to our Lisa Desjardins
on the Hill, who with is with a Democratic
senator -- Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
I'm with Senator Heidi Heitkamp.
She's one of the moderates in Congress who
may decide what President Trump is able to
get through the Senate or not.
What did you think of this speech?
SEN.
HEIDI HEITKAMP (D), North Dakota: Well, Ithought it was well-measured.
I thought that it was very, very hard to disagree
with any of the goals, any of the aspirations.
I think the devil is in the details.
And I think we are obviously very concerned
about what is going to happen with health
care, what is going to happen with tax reductions,
making sure that they really go to people
who need them.
And I think -- I think we're -- you know,
who can argue with all of the great aspirations
that the president set out tonight?
I will tell you, I was disappointed.
Rural America really delivered for this president,
and there was nothing in this speech that
really addressed some of the challenges.
LISA DESJARDINS: He did speak about urban
America in the speech.
SEN.
HEIDI HEITKAMP: I think a lot of it was.
And I was hoping for a recognition that some
of the greatest poverty in America actually
exists in rural areas.
We need to do everything we can to continue
to help our agricultural sector, but also
work to build rural America.
LISA DESJARDINS: Senator Heidi Heitkamp, thank
you so much for joining us -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Lisa.
And, as you just said, Senator Heitkamp, one
of those who is from what we call a red state.
She is a Democrat, so she has to think about
how both Democrats and Republicans in her
state are reacting.
Just quickly, David Brooks, before we go to
the Democratic response, are you surprised
that he didn't mention anything about rural
America?
DAVID BROOKS: I guess so.
Mark is right that he had some domestic policy
things, but -- on infrastructure, but he was
pretty skimpy on that stuff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we're going to comeback to that in a moment.
We are told that Governor Beshear, former
governor -- former governor of Kentucky, is
ready.
STEVE BESHEAR (D), Former Governor of Kentucky:
I'm Steve Beshear.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was former Kentucky Governor
Steve Beshear, delivering the Democrats' response
to the president's address to a joint session
of Congress.
And we should say that the Democrats' Spanish-language
response was delivered by a woman named Astrid
Silva.
She was a dreamer brought to this country
without legal documentation, but now an activist
for the cause of immigration reform.
David Brooks, Steve Beshear, somebody who
-- he spoke very plainly and said, the president,
you need to be the champion of all the people,not the champion of Wall Street.
DAVID BROOKS: I thought that was really good,
too.
I thought that was one of the better responses.
He spoke humanely, naturally, not canned.
It helps to have a 72-year-old guy, maybe.
He is not running for anything anymore.
And so he can just be a little more relaxed.
I thought he was very genuine.
Two things struck me as interesting, one,
that there is just a ton of energy in activism
in blue America right now.
And the Democrats chose as their respondent
a white guy from red America, and a rural
guy through the pores.
And so that was interesting to me, the choice
of what demographic to emphasize.
The second thing and I think one of the reasons
they chose him is, Kentucky is a state where
the Affordable Care Act is doing super well.
And so, if they want somebody to say, no,
this is working, we have got to keep this,
Kentucky is the place you want to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter?
AMY WALTER: I -- Gosh, I just find myself
saying, David is right.
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: We are on the same wavelength.
And the interesting thing, when we talk about
the Affordable Care Act and where it is going
to go from here, it is pretty clear that,
from the speech that we heard from President
Trump tonight and the response from the former
governor of Kentucky, is a showdown between
how many people get their costs reduced vs.
how many people get to stay on Obamacare.
And the challenge for Obamacare from the very
beginning has been this, that, while there
are millions of more people that have health
care in this country, there are millions more
who get their health insurance through means
that is not Obamacare.
And a lot of those folks are worried.
Either they have seen their premiums increase
or they're worried they are going to increase.
And so when I hear from voters out there about
this issue, what I hear first and foremost
about cost.
That is the challenge for Trump, is to -- hesaid he is going to lower costs.
Is his administration going to be able to
do that?
And is it going to be -- or is it going to
be, as Steve Beshear, former governor, said,
that you are going to have millions of people
kicked off a system that was helping them?
Which one of those things is going to become
more potent in this over health care?
And Beshear made his line on people getting
kicked off.
And we're going to hear from Republicans about
the cost piece.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we're going to come
back to this discussion in just a minute.
But, right now, our Lisa Desjardins is Capitol
Hill with a Republican, Congressman Jim Jordan
from Ohio -- Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, notable Congressman
Jim Jordan.
Thank you for joining us.
REP.
JIM JORDAN (R), Ohio: You bet.
LISA DESJARDINS: What did you make of this
speech?
You're thought of as a very conservative member
of the House.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: Well, I thought it was very good.
I really did.
And I think, right at the start, when he said
America is ready to lead, it sort of sets
a different tone, a different context, a different
framework than frankly what we conservatives
have seen with the previous president.
So I liked that.
I thought it was a great speech, well delivered,
well done, and said the right things.
But I really think the moment that everyone
is going to remember is Carryn Owens, was
just powerful.
You think about what she has went through
in and the sacrifice her husband made and
what he has meant to our country.
I thought this was a really powerful moment,but, overall, just very good.
LISA DESJARDINS: We have been hearing that
from Democrats as well.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: I want to ask you about two
issues and one question.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: Sure.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sort of usually a trick of
a White House reporter, but we're tonight
in the Capitol.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: Right.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president presented a
budget that would slash domestic discretionary
spending.
All right, that is his outline.
And at the same time this week, we also have
Affordable Care Act moving forward.
Both of those issues, are you in line with
where the president is going right now?
REP.
JIM JORDAN: I think, on the Affordable Care
Act, I think he said repeal and replace.
He talked about giving Medicaid, the flexibility
back to the governors in the states.
We're all for that, block-granting Medicaid.
We just -- we need to put the same repeal
bill on President Trump's desk that we put
on President Obama's desk.
And then the replacement legislation, we have
introduced one that we think will actually
bring down the costs.
So, I think
LISA DESJARDINS: But your conference isn't
all necessarily in agreement on a full repeal.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: Well, there is only one plan that
is consistent with what we told the voters.
It's one the House Freedom Caucus put forward
and Dr. Paul has put forward on the Senate
side.
So, I think that that makes sense.
The budget, what Mick Mulvaney rolled out
this week and what -- President Trump's budget,
we like.
It ups defense spending and it says, let's
get rid of the waste and redundancy, and let's
cut non-defense.
That's what conservatives have always been
for.
We are supposed to spend your tax dollarson defending this country.
That is paramount importance, issue number
for the federal government, responsibility
number one.
But you also have got offset it, because wehave got $20 trillion debt.
So, I like where that is going.
I'm encouraged by what I heard from Mr. Mulvaney
and from the president.
LISA DESJARDINS: OK.
Thank you very much, Congressman Jim Jordan
of Ohio.
REP.
JIM JORDAN: You bet.
LISA DESJARDINS: Back to you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Lisa.
And thanks to Congressman Jordan.
Karine Jean-Pierre, we keep coming back to
the Affordable Care Act.
Isn't that interesting, the Obama legacy?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Right.
You know, one thing that Republicans have
done these past several weeks is make Obamacare
popular again.
They sold Obamacare better than Democrats
did for six years.
I mean, that's the -- we had a hard time communicatingthe importance of Obamacare.
And now people are realizing that they don't
want their health care taken away.
And that is something Republicans are dealing
with.
It is not just rhetoric now.
You actually have to govern and make something
happen.
How do you speak to the tens of millions of
Americans who are relying on this very important
health care that they have?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Matt Schlapp, that was
part of what Steve Beshear, the former governor
of Kentucky, was telling us in his response.
MATT SCHLAPP: Well, you know, it is important
to remember one of the remembers that Donald
Trump is the president is because these Obamacare
premium letters went out right before the
election.
And these premium increases have been a shock
to families all across the country.
And that is the fundamental question here,
which is, Obamacare did not keep its promise
to make health care affordable.
I agree you can roll out numbers to say that
there are more people who actually have health
insurance.
It doesn't mean they have greater access to
health care.
It doesn't mean that we have done anything
to control the costs.
And I think the bottom line is, if we don't
do anything to try to fix our health care
system, it is on a rocky road.
And the American voter has sent a message
in three out of the last four elections that
it is not acceptable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But there is still -- I mean,
Mark, there is a lot of struggling going on
to figure out among Republicans what theyare going to replace it with.
MARK SHIELDS: No, there certainly
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or even if there should be
a replacement.
MARK SHIELDS: No, that's right.
I mean -- and I agree.
I agree with Matt that the letter in October
was devastating.
But I think, if it weren't a problem, you
would see a lot more Republicans holding town
meetings.
And the ones who have, have been confronted
with the face of people who have who have
faced death or worse, but the Obama health
care plan has saved their lives, has given
them coverage that they didn't have.
Steve Beshear did a couple of things, Judy,
that the Democrats have been faulted for,
and legitimately so.
They are a coastal party.
They're an elite party.
They're a party of what is the great new Cabernet
and what is to the trendiest thing?
This was salt of the earth, Friday night football
in the bleachers, Sunday night in churches.
Democrats don't talk about Sunday morning
pews.
And Steve Beshear not only did it.
He didn't do it in a contrived way.
It was natural.
He was comfortable doing it.
And I think it is always a tough thing to
answer the president, any president, in the
State of the Union or a joint session, because
of all of the ceremony, the Joint Chiefs and
the Supreme Court.
And they did it right by not trying to emulate
it, do it in a statehouse or in a city hall,
or in a formal setting.
So I think, in that sense, it really worked.
One thing that we should do, President Trump
cannot resist taking credit for things he
doesn't deserve and are very risky.
He said the stock market had increased almost
$3 trillion in value since his election.
Post hoc, propter hoc, as they say in Latin,
because, after this, because of this -- and
that is dangerous stuff, because, you know,
if -- he is going to be held accountable when
the stock market does take a dip, and does
hit a rough patch.
The last time we had 12 days in a row or anything
like that was 1987.
You will recall what happened in 1987, when
the closest thing to 1929 we faced.
MATT SCHLAPP: But you don't deny there is
an enthusiasm in corporate America and in
the economy for the fact that we are going
to actually do something to get our economy
rolling?
MARK SHIELDS: I think there is.
I think there would have been even if Hillary
Clinton had won.
I think that was building.
But I think there is a sense that they aregoing to have their taxes cut.
He promised that to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, back to Capitol
Hill.
Our Lisa Desjardins is with Senator Ted Cruz
-- Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right, former presidential
candidate Ted Cruz.
What did you make -- you wanted to be at thatpodium tonight at one point.
What did you make of this president's speech?
SEN.
TED CRUZ (R), Texas: Well, I thought it was
a strong, bold, positive vision for the country.
And I think it was -- it was a reflection
of where millions of Americans are.
The number one priority I hear from Texans,
I hear from people across the country is jobs
and economic growth.
People are frustrated with the stagnation.
People are frustrated with manufacturing jobs
going away, with less opportunity for our
kids.
And, tonight, what I heard from President
Trump was a bold vision that begins with repealing
Obamacare, the biggest job killer in this
country.
I think this election was a referendum on
Obamacare.
That includes regulatory reform.
I was very encouraged to hear so much emphasis
on reducing the burdens of Washington on small
businesses and job creators.
And that includes also fundamental tax reform,simplifying the tax code.
The result of all of that, I believe, will
be booming economic growth, millions of new
high-paying jobs.
I think that is exactly what Americans are
looking for from their president.
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, I counted at one
point 44 different topics in that speech.
States of the Union or messages to Congress
often have sort of a laundry list of ideas
and goals.
But I didn't hear anything about how this
president would pay for those things.
That is going to be your job.
Are you concerned about that, especially with
a $1 trillion infrastructure plan, on top
of all of the ideas he had, keeping coverage,
keeping subsidies for Affordable Care Act?
SEN.
TED CRUZ: There is no doubt the details are
very important.
How things are paid for is important.
But the only way to pay for our fundamental
needs, the only way to pay down our debt is
to bring back economic growth.
Economic growth is the only the first-order
variable.
If you look at the federal budget, everything
else is a second- or third-order variable.
Economic growth is key.
Since World War II, we have averaged 3.3 percent
economic growth a year.
In the Obama eight years, we were consistentlyat 1 and 2 percent GDP growth.
If we don't change that, we can't solve any
of the problems.
And the reason I was so energized is, I heard
tonight an agenda that, if we deliver on it,
if we repeal Obamacare, if we have serious
regulatory reform, serious tax reform, a simple
flat tax, I think we can see 4, 5 percent
GDP growth.
We can see millions of new jobs, higher wages.
That in turn will generate billions of additional
tax revenue to meet the needs we have.
LISA DESJARDINS: OK.
Texas Senator Ted Cruz, thank you for joining
us -- Judy.
SEN.
TED CRUZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Lisa.
And thank you, Senator Cruz.
So, David Brooks, are we party poopers to
be worrying about how much things cost?
DAVID BROOKS: Absolutely.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: We are going to grow our way
of out of this.
Senator Cruz is actually wrong about that.
You can't grow your way out of the entitlements
issue.
You know, it's funny.
The Republican -- the establishment of the
Republican Party stood for America is a global
leader, leading the free world.
It stood for entitlement reform.
The Tea Party wing of the party stood for
cutting the debt and shrinking the size of
government.
Donald Trump has come in and reversed both
of those.
And so he has had this radical effect on the
Republican Party.
The one part of the party that he has kept
orthodox on is on deregulation and tax reform.
And so what we see is a guy who is redefining
the Republican Party, both from the Republican
establishment, the Paul Ryan wing, but also
from the Freedom Caucus, Tea Party wing, and
then keeping one element that is pretty much
the same.
But we are seeing dramatic changes in what
a modern American party stands for, a much
more activist government than any compassionate
conservative or any big government conservative
heretofore would have asked for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Karine Jean-Pierre, that
makes it harder for Democrats to counter,
doesn't it?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: It does, but, I mean,
the way that I see all of this is that is
the Democratic Party is in streets.
That's who -- those are the people who are
truly going to move this party forward.
And I think that a perfect example is what
we saw in Delaware.
We took back a state Senate seat.
We have the majority.
And
MATT SCHLAPP: It is Delaware.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Yes, but here is the thing.
The interesting thing about that story is
that they had hundreds, close to thousands
of people come out to volunteer to help with
that seat, because people were reinvigorated.
They were engaging.
So, if we can do that a little bit at a time
with special races that are coming up, like
in Georgia 6, and other races in 2017, leading
to 2018, I think that will make a difference
for Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the war of ideas, Amy,
is it equally possible for the Democrats to
come back, because they have got energy in
the streets?
AMY WALTER: Well, it is always better to have
energy and anger than it is to have love.
I'm sorry to say, in politics, that is the
case.
And you want -- if you are up for reelection,
you want people who are angry and inspired
and going to turn out no matter what.
So, Democrats definitely have some opportunities
there.
But the challenge for Democrats, we have talked
about this a lot, is where that energy is,
which is, in many cases, in the same placesthat Hillary Clinton carried.
Where they need that energy is in places where
you had Senator Heidi Heitkamp camp on.
It needs to be in North Dakota.
It needs to be in West Virginia.
It needs to be in Missouri.
It needs to be in suburban America, where
the race for the House is going to be.
And so the Democrats' geography challenge
is going to be the most interesting thing
to watch.
And so where that -- you know, it is great
to have energy, but it has to be in the right
place to win seats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Matt Schlapp, thinking
back to what the president had to say tonight,
and it was -- he had a little bit of somethingfor a lot of people in there.
MATT SCHLAPP: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a message that is
going to touch some Democrats or independents
who just really weren't willing to give him
much of a listen before?
MATT SCHLAPP: Remember, he did very well with
independents.
And he did very well with working-class Democrats.
And he won in states like Wisconsin, Pennsylvania,
Michigan that Republicans haven't been even
that close to winning.
So he already has got the making of an interesting
new coalition.
And I actually do disagree with much of what
was said here tonight.
I actually think there is already a budget
plan that he is -- that already has been semi-rolled
out that has massive cuts.
He is actually trying to make responsible
decisions on the discretionary side of the
house.
I agree with you on entitlements.
You are not going to grow your way to fix
those things.
That is not something you are going to tackle
in the first year, when you have to take care
of Obamacare and tax reform.
And let's face it.
He talked about the five-point plan he hasfor an Obamacare replacement.
Paul Ryan has passed an Obamacare replacement,
which Obama vetoed, in the reconciliation
a couple of years ago.
Tom Price has had a bill every year in Congress.
This is not going to be that hard to figure
out what the Republican replacement is for
Obamacare, although they are going to have
to get them themselves through it.
And I think the same thing will be true for
taxes.
Remember, both of those issues will flow throughthe budget and reconciliation.
So, they are actually going to be able to
get these two big accomplishments in the first
year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you are saying we are being
too -- some of us
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: You are a being a little dour,
a little dour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A little dour, OK.
We are being served notice here.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, before we get any
further, I want to go back to our John Yang
at the White House, who is -- John, the president
did bring out -- talk a little bit more tonight
about his idea about immigration reform.
But, tomorrow, we are going to see the specifics
of the re-rollout of the so-called travel
ban.
What's it -- do you know what it is going
to look like?
JOHN YANG: Well, they think they have gotten
around some of the issues that -- the due
process issues, that the Ninth Circuit, or
that the judge in Seattle objected to.
It is going to apply only to people -- futuretravelers to the United States.
It won't affect people who are green card
holders.
It will not affect people who are in the air.
There will be -- what they objected to the
first time -- sort of warning that this is
coming.
But we are going to see this rollout, as many
presidents do.
Things that came up in the speech, he is going
to do things to reinforce those themes for
the rest of the week.
Thursday, he goes down to the Norfolk Naval
-- Navy Shipyard, and he will give a speech
at the USS Gerald Ford, the first of the new
class of super carriers, to talk about building
up the military, protecting America, from
that point of view.
Friday, in Orlando, a school choice event,
so building on some of the themes you heard
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, John Yang at the
White House.
Mark Shields, the president is not standing
still.
MARK SHIELDS: He is not standing still.
And in response to my good friend Matt, the
happy warrior, the
MATT SCHLAPP: Oh, you are setting me up.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: The cheerful optimist.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: We are going to expand choices.
We are going to increase access.
We are going to acknowledge preexisting condition.
We are going to lower costs.
And -- but -- and this is going to be done
cheaper.
It is going to be better for everybody.
And the only thing I compare it to, returning
to David's roly-poly mention at the outset,
is the hot fudge sundae diet, which was advertised
in one of those weekly papers available at
the checkout counter at the grocery store,
where, if you eat four hot fudge sundaes every
day, you will lose eight pounds by Thursday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I like that.
I like that.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly.
And it is painless.
It is ouchless.
And I -- the devil was in the details.
Everything is in the details.
Life and death are in the details.
And I don't think it is going to sail through.
Selling a tax cut is about the easiest thingto do politically imaginable.
And selling a tax cut to a Republican Congress,
I mean, is truly like giving beer to Marines
on leave.
I mean, it is not a tough sell.
MATT SCHLAPP: So, it is going to happen.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Well, I mean, they are going to argue about
just how much the Goldman Sachs crowd is going
to get, whether they are going to 80 percent
or 83, but they will have a tax cut.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: I would just like to say, there
was a five-point plan.
And it was to allow for preexisting conditions,
to transition from state exchanges and get
rid of them, to expand HSAs and have tax credits
that are refundable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: These are health savings accounts.
MATT SCHLAPP: To give the governors block
grants on Medicaid, and to have tort reform.
Now, that is a five-part plan that Republicans
are going to get behind.
And, by the way, most of this can be done
on reconciliation, with simply 50 votes.
So, get ready, Mark.
It is coming your way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that doesn't cover everybody.
That's not going to cover everybody.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: But that's not the question.
I think what Amy said earlier, we are not
going to make the line in the sand on the
number of people who are covered.
We are going to make the line in the stand
on the affordability of health care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think it is a much heavier
political lift.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: I think the health savings accounts,
an idea I support, by the way, is a tough
lift.
I think there are a lot of people who
MARK SHIELDS: Never, ever sold.
DAVID BROOKS: A lot of people who feel, I
got enough risk and insecurity in my life
right now.
Am I really going to take this on?
I remember the Social Security reform fightthat George W. Bush fought.
And you could face a similar sort of deal,
especially in a country that is much more
distress-filled.
And, as for tax reform, if they go to cut
the corporate rates, a good idea, by the way,
that, they can do.
They will do that.
If they -- but he was talking about comprehensive
tax reform.
If they do something a little more comprehensive,
with the normal model of simplifying the rates
and widening the base, getting rid of some
of the loopholes, that is a much tougher thing.
Every treasury secretary comes into office
and discovers, oh, I want to get rid of all
of these loopholes.
Every loophole has a veto bloc somewhere inthis town surrounding it.
Those are both super tough political lifts.
I am not saying it is impossible, but I would
not be surprised if they were zero for two
at the end of this year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, I'm going to interrupt
and go back to the Capitol, our Lisa Desjardins,
who is just running into all sorts of important
people.
The ambassador from the United States to the
U.N., Nikki Haley, is with you, Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Ambassador Haley, thank you so much for joining
us here in our corner of the Capitol.
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador To The United
Nations: Thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: What, especially in your
job, was important about this speech tonight?
NIKKI HALEY: Well, I think, if you heard his
tone on foreign policy, it was spot on.
What we want our allies to know is, we are
going to have your back.
We want them to have our backs as well.
And then what we want to do is, those that
challenge us, we are going to call them out
on it.
And I think he made it very clear that Americais going to be a leader again.
We are going to really show our strength again.
And I think he is all about action.
So it was a great speech.
LISA DESJARDINS: He has spoken on the campaign
trail and again tonight about making sure
NATO allies carry their share of the costs.
How do you determine what that is, and how
do you execute that exactly, and when do you
start executing that?
NIKKI HALEY: Well, they should be paying based
on what their revenues are coming in.
That's what they are supposed to be doing.
But what has happened with all of these organizations
is, they have become very dependent on the
United States to just carry the burden.
What he is saying is, we want to work with
you, you are our allies, but you have got
to help us carry this burden.
LISA DESJARDINS: When do you start building
that kind of pressure?
NIKKI HALEY: Well, you know, and I think they're
responding.
Already, he is getting great responses from
NATO.
They are starting to get the money that is
coming in.
We are starting to spread that word throughthe United Nations as well.
And I think those things are really important.
LISA DESJARDINS: One quick question.
Our panel has talked a lot about President
Trump as an organizer.
What is he like as a boss?
How is he communicating with you?
NIKKI HALEY: You know, I just met with him
yesterday.
He is very flexible.
He allows us to do our job, which is what
I love.
He supports us there through the process.
And if there is anything we need, all we have
to do is call him or come see him.
He has been fantastic to work with.
LISA DESJARDINS: You call his cell phone?
Is it that easy?
NIKKI HALEY: Yes.
You just give him a phone call, or you justsay, I need to come see you.
He is incredibly flexible.
But he really wants us to be at our best.
He wants us to surround ourselves with the
people that make a good team, but he has been
a great leader so far.
LISA DESJARDINS: U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley,
thank you so much for joining us -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks to the ambassador.
Thanks to you again, Lisa.
Amy Walter, I actually didn't hear that much
about foreign policy in this speech.
AMY WALTER: No, because, remember, this is
America first, and this is about being the
president of America, and it is on -- he ran
on that platform and on domestic issues.
I just want to go back to this point about
whether or not we can see Democrats working
with Republicans and whether he is taking
away that sort of core Democratic -- some
of the core Democratic principles on the economy,
blue-collar workers, things like that.
The question is where he leads from.
And so if he leads from some of the issues
he outlined today and in the way he outlined
them, yes, you could see a plausible path
forward for bringing some Democrats forward.
But if he is leading on, we have this executive
order, that is going to alienate.
We heard his -- during the speech, when he
was talking about illegal immigrants and the
crimes they were committing, and he was putting
a new task force together, there were audible
groans in the audience, Democrats saying,
that is right.
We are going to focus on an entire segment
of law enforcement for an issue that they
don't -- they believe that immigrants arebeing unfairly targeted on.
So, if he is leading from a place of division,
let's do the things that are really dividing
the Democrats and Republicans, or, in this
case, broader -- more broadly, the country,
you are not going to get the buy-in as if
you are leading with the other piece of it.
And so I think that is always going to be
this balancing act for so many members, even
members of his own party, who want him to
lead with many of the things in the speech,
and then find themselves on the defensive
when he goes and does something that is outside
of what they need.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Less than two minutes here.
Matt Schlapp, is that something you are worried
about?
MATT SCHLAPP: Yes, well, I think -- I can
see the path in the first two years, for sure.
I actually think the questions of immigration
and trade and some of these E.O.s are very
popular in states where Heidi
JUDY WOODRUFF: Executive orders, right.
MATT SCHLAPP: Where Heidi Heitkamp camp will
be running and Claire McCaskill will be running
and Joe Manchin.
So, for the first two years, I can see how
the politics work with the Senate seats that
are up in '18.
You know, I am not smart enough to know how
it goes in the two years after that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: So, I'm going to basically
end it the way -- same way I started it, which
is actions speak louder than words.
And his actions these last 30-some-odd days
have proven to be divisive and dark.
And here is a perfect example.
Today, he talked to -- he did an executive
order on HBCUs, historical black college and
universities.
And that was an opportunity to -- that was
an opportunity to reach across the aisle.
And when you read the executive order, there
is nothing there.
It is a nothing burger.
There is actually no new money to help out
HBCUs.
So, that is what it has been looking like.
Either you have executive orders that are
just like press releases, they're glorified
press releases, or they're pretty divisive
and dark.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, bring us all together,
Mark and David.
You have got 20 seconds to do it in.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Judy, I think it's going
to -- OK.
I will say David is right about a tax -- the
tax cut.
In 1986, Bill Bradley was the architect of
it.
It took five years.
But, if you are just talking about a corporatetax cut, that will sail through.
But if you are really getting into personal
and getting rid of loopholes, then you are
back and forth, and it is not going to be
an easy thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You get the last word.
DAVID BROOKS: Quickly, he has been leaking
air since the inauguration, losing support.
He will have reversed that tonight.
He will get a boost in the polls.
A lot of people think, OK, he seems normal,
seems good.
So, he stopped the slide that he has had since
Inauguration Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thus spake -- spoke -- spake
David Brooks.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Spake a lot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you all for staying here
all night.
And that concludes our special live coverage
of the president's address to Congress and
to the nation, and the Democrats' response.
Thanks to all of our guests tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Stay with us as our coverage continues online.
And for all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," thankyou, and we will see you soon.